docs(parser): change parser documentation (#5262)
awslabs/aws-lambda-powertools-python: docs/utilities/parser.md

title: Parser (Pydantic)
description: Utility
---

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD043 -->

The Parser utility simplifies data parsing and validation using [Pydantic](https://pydantic-docs.helpmanual.io/){target="_blank" rel="nofollow"}. It allows you to define data models in pure Python classes, parse and validate incoming events, and extract only the data you need.

## Key features

- Define data models using Python classes
- Parse and validate Lambda event payloads
- Built-in support for common AWS event sources
- Runtime type checking with user-friendly error messages

> - Compatible with Pydantic v2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Compatible with Pydantic v2.x
```

Reviewer 2: Done

## Getting started

### Install

> Powertools only supports Pydantic v2, so make sure to install the required dependencies for Pydantic v2 before using the Parser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Powertools supports Pydantic v2.x, so make sure to install it before using this utility.
```

Reviewer 2: Powertools only = Before this, we supported both v1 and v2, so I think it's okay to emphasize the "only" world.

Dependencies needed for Pydantic v2 before using Parser = In pydantic v1, things like base-settings, email-validator and others came together in the Pydantic package instalattion, but now they are separate packages.

So I prefer to keep it as it is.

```python

> pip install aws-lambda-powertools[tracer]

Reviewer: I think this should say `aws-lambda-powertools[parser]` - if unsure check with @leandrodamascena.

Reviewer 2: Ohhh my god! My bad! Yeah

```

!!! info "This is not necessary if you're installing Powertools for AWS Lambda (Python) via [Lambda Layer/SAR](../index.md#lambda-layer){target="_blank"}"

> You can also add as a dependency in your preferred tool: `e.g., requirements.txt, pyproject.toml`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also add as a dependency in your preferred tool, e.g. `requirements.txt`, `pyproject.toml`, etc.
```

Reviewer 2: Nice, accepted.

> ### Data Model with Parse

Reviewer: Is "Parse" here intentional or should it be "Parser"?

If it's intentional, feel free to resolve this thread.

Reviewer 2: You're right, `Parser` is better.

You can define models by inheriting from `BaseModel` or any other supported type through `TypeAdapter` to parse incoming events. Pydantic then validates the data, ensuring that all fields conform to the specified types and maintaining data integrity.

???+ info
    The new TypeAdapter feature provide a flexible way to perform validation and serialization based on a Python type. Read more in the [Pydantic documentation](https://docs.pydantic.dev/latest/api/type_adapter/){target="_blank" rel="nofollow"}.

#### Event parser

> The `@event_parser` decorator automatically parses the incoming event into the specified Pydantic model `MyEvent`. If the input doesn't match the model's structure or type requirements, we raises a `ValidationError` directly from Pydantic.

Reviewer: The verb in the last sentence is incorrect, should be either "we raise" or "it raises", I think.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, it raises.

=== "getting_started_with_parser.py"

    ```python hl_lines="3 11"
    --8<-- "examples/parser/src/getting_started_with_parser.py"
    ```

=== "Sample event"

    ```json
    --8<-- "examples/parser/src/example_event_parser.json"
    ```

#### Parse function

You can use the `parse()` function when you need to have flexibility with different event formats, custom pre-parsing logic, and better exception handling.

=== "parser_function.py"

    ```python hl_lines="3 15"
    --8<-- "examples/parser/src/parser_function.py"
    ```

=== "Sample event"

    ```json
    --8<-- "examples/parser/src/example_event_parser.json"
    ```

> #### Keys difference between parse and event_parser

Reviewer: Is the "Keys" plural intentional? Should it be "Key differences" instead?

Reviewer 2: Great catch

The `parse()` function offers more flexibility and control:

- It allows parsing different parts of an event using multiple models.
- You can conditionally handle events before parsing them.
- It's useful for integrating with complex workflows where a decorator might not be sufficient.
- It provides more control over the validation process and handling exceptions.

The `@event_parser` decorator is ideal for:

- Fail-fast scenarios where you want to immediately stop execution if the event payload is invalid.
- Simplifying your code by automatically parsing and validating the event at the function entry point.

### Built-in models

> You can use pre-built models provided by the Parser for parsing events from AWS services, so you don’t need to create these models yourself, we’ve already done that for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use pre-built models to work events from AWS services, so you don’t need to create them yourself. We’ve already done that for you!
```

Reviewer 2: Nice suggestion.

title: Parser (Pydantic)
description: Utility
---

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD043 -->

The Parser utility simplifies data parsing and validation using [Pydantic](https://pydantic-docs.helpmanual.io/){target="\_blank" rel="nofollow"}. It allows you to define data models in pure Python classes, parse and validate incoming events, and extract only the data you need.

## Key features

- Define data models using Python classes
- Parse and validate Lambda event payloads
- Built-in support for common AWS event sources
- Runtime type checking with user-friendly error messages
- Compatible with Pydantic v2

## Getting started

### Install

> Parser supports Pydantic v2. Each Pydantic version requires different dependencies before you can use Parser.

Reviewer 2: We are supporting only Pydantic v2 now, so, the part "each pydanic" is not necessary anymore. What about: Parser supports Pydantic v2. To use Parser, you'll need to install the necessary dependencies for Pydantic v2 beforehand.?

Author: Great call, updated!

```python
pip install aws-lambda-powertools
```

!!! info "This is not necessary if you're installing Powertools for AWS Lambda (Python) via [Lambda Layer/SAR](../index.md#lambda-layer){target="\_blank"}"

???+ warning
    This will increase the compressed package size by >10MB due to the Pydantic dependency.

    To reduce the impact on the package size at the expense of 30%-50% of its performance[Pydantic can also be
    installed without binary files](https://pydantic-docs.helpmanual.io/install/#performance-vs-package-size-trade-off){target="_blank" rel="nofollow"}:

>     Pip example:`SKIP_CYTHON=1 pip install --no-binary pydantic aws-lambda-powertools[parser]`

Reviewer 2: You can remove this block. Pydantic v2 doesn't work like that.

Author: Removed!

You can also add as a dependency in your preferred tool: e.g., requirements.txt, pyproject.toml.

### Data Model with Parse

Define models by inheriting from `BaseModel` to parse incoming events. Pydantic then validates the data, ensuring all fields adhere to specified types and guaranteeing data integrity.

#### Event parser

The `event_parser` decorator automatically parses and validates the event.

```python title="getting_started_with_parser.py" hl_lines="2 8"
--8<-- "examples/parser/src/getting_started_with_parser.py"

> ```

Reviewer 2: Great example, but there is a problem here. When using `@event_parser` you can't catch the exception inside the Lambda because the validation [happens before](https://github.com/aws-powertools/powertools-lambda-python/blob/7eb6026264b434f0b1017b41b2621c165c2b5bde/aws_lambda_powertools/utilities/parser/parser.py#L110) to execute the Lambda handler. So, in this case you can remove the try/except block and add a new line before the `The @event_parser(model=MyEvent) automatically` explaining that this function fails fast.

Also, pelase create a new JSON file and add as example of the payload. Something like this: https://docs.powertools.aws.dev/lambda/python/latest/utilities/idempotency/#sample-event.

In this case your payload is just id and name:

{
"id": "bla",
"name": "bla"
}

Author: Thanks, created the example!

> The `@event_parser(model=MyEvent)` automatically parses the event into the specified Pydantic model MyEvent.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `@event_parser(model=MyEvent)` automatically parses the event into the specified Pydantic model `MyEvent`.
```

Author: Fixed it! Thanks

> ```

Reviewer 2: Missing highlights here.

Author: Thanks! Added the highlights

> The function catches **ValidationError**, returning a 400 status code with an error message if the input doesn't match the `MyEvent` model. It provides robust error handling for invalid inputs.

Reviewer 2: Amazing explanation! 🚀

> #### Parse function

Reviewer 2: Hey @anafalcao, there is something weird here. Pls take a look

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/84c2c7b1-1263-4612-b329-7655216481eb)

Author: Fixed it! It was breaking due to a "---" prior to the sub header

> The `parse()` function allows you to manually control when and how an event is parsed into a Pydantic model. This can be useful in cases where you need flexibility, such as handling different event formats or adding custom logic before parsing.

Reviewer 2: Great explanation.

> ```python title="parser_function.py" hl_lines="2 12"

Reviewer 2: same here:

>Also, pelase create a new JSON file and add as example of the payload. Something like this: [docs.powertools.aws.dev/lambda/python/latest/utilities/idempotency#sample-event](https://docs.powertools.aws.dev/lambda/python/latest/utilities/idempotency/#sample-event).

Author: Thanks, created the example!

--8<-- "examples/parser/src/parser_function.py"
```

**Should I use parse() or @event_parser? 🤔**

The `parse()` function offers more flexibility and control:

- It allows parsing different parts of an event using multiple models.
- You can conditionally handle events before parsing them.
- It's useful for integrating with complex workflows where a decorator might not be sufficient.
- It provides more control over the validation process.

The `@event_parser` decorator is ideal for:

- Fail-fast scenarios where you want to immediately stop execution if the event payload is invalid.
- Simplifying your code by automatically parsing and validating the event at the function entry point.

### Built-in models

> Parser provides built-in models for parsing events from AWS services. You don't need to worry about creating these models yourself - we've already done that for you, making it easier to process AWS events in your Lambda functions.

Reviewer 2: Please create an example in this section.

Author: Example and sample event added to built-in models

**Purpose of the Envelope**

- Data Extraction: The envelope helps extract the specific data we need from a larger, more complex event structure.
- Standardization: It allows us to handle different event sources in a consistent manner.
- Simplification: By using an envelope, we can focus on parsing only the relevant part of the event, ignoring the surrounding metadata.

Envelopes can be used via `envelope` parameter available in both `parse` function and `event_parser` decorator.

All you want is what's inside the `detail` key, from the payload in the sample example.

Using `@event_parser` decorator to automatically parse the EventBridge event and extract the UserModel data. The envelope, specifically `envelopes.EventBridgeEnvelope` in this case, is used to extract the relevant data from a complex event structure. It acts as a wrapper or container that holds additional metadata and the actual payload we're interested in.

=== "Envelopes using event parser decorator"

    ```python
    --8<-- "examples/parser/src/envelope_with_event_parser.py"

>     ```

Reviewer 2: Missing highlights.

Author: Added the highlights

=== "Sample event"

    ```json
    --8<-- "examples/parser/src/envelope_payload.json"

>     ```

Reviewer 2: Missing highlights.

| **KafkaEnvelope**             | 1. Parses data using `KafkaRecordModel`. ``2. Parses`value` key using your model and returns it.                                                                                                      | `Model`                            |
| **VpcLatticeEnvelope**        | 1. Parses data using `VpcLatticeModel`. ``2. Parses`value` key using your model and returns it.                                                                                                       | `Model`                            |
| **BedrockAgentEnvelope**      | 1. Parses data using `BedrockAgentEventModel`. ``2. Parses`inputText` key using your model and returns it.                                                                                            | `Model`                            |

#### Bringing your own envelope

You can create your own Envelope model and logic by inheriting from `BaseEnvelope`, and implementing the `parse` method.

Here's a snippet of how the EventBridge envelope we demonstrated previously is implemented.

=== "Bring your own envelope with Event Bridge"

    ```python

>     --8<-- "examples/parser/src/bring_your_own_envelope.py"

Reviewer 2: Missing highlights.

Author: Added highlights

Author: Added the highlights

    ```

=== "Sample event"

    ```json

>     --8<-- "examples/parser/src/bring_your_own_envelope.json"

Reviewer 2: Missing highlights.

Author: Added the highlights

**What's going on here, you might ask**:

- **EventBridgeEnvelope**: extracts the detail field from EventBridge events.
- **OrderDetail Model**: defines and validates the structure of order data.
- **@event_parser**: decorator automates parsing and validation of incoming events using the specified model and envelope.

### Data model validation

???+ warning
    This is radically different from the **Validator utility** which validates events against JSON Schema.

You can use Pydantic's validator for deep inspection of object values and complex relationships.

There are two types of class method decorators you can use:

- **`field_validator`** - Useful to quickly validate an individual field and its value
- **`model_validator`** - Useful to validate the entire model's data

Keep the following in mind regardless of which decorator you end up using it:

- You must raise either `ValueError`, `TypeError`, or `AssertionError` when value is not compliant
- You must return the value(s) itself if compliant

#### Field Validator

Quick validation using decorator `field_validator` to verify whether the field `message` has the value of `hello world`.

```python title="field_validator.py"

> --8<-- "examples/parser/src/field_validator.py"

Reviewer 2: Missing highlights.

Author: Added the highlights

```

If you run using a test event `{"message": "hello universe"}` you should expect the following error with the message we provided in our exception:

```python
  Message must be hello world! (type=value_error)
```

Alternatively, you can pass `'*'` as an argument for the decorator so that you can validate every value available.

```python title="field_validator_all_values.py"
--8<-- "examples/parser/src/field_validator_all_values.py"

> ```

Reviewer 2: Missing highlights.

Author: Added the highlights

Try with `event={"message": "hello universe", "sender": "universe"}` to get a validation error, as "sender" does not contain white spaces.

#### Model validator

`model_validator` can help when you have a complex validation mechanism. For example finding whether data has been omitted or comparing field values.

**Key points about model_validator:**

- It runs after all other validators have been called.
- It receives all the values of the model as a dictionary.
- It can modify or validate multiple fields at once.
- It's useful for validations that depend on multiple fields.

```python title="model_validator.py"

> --8<-- "examples/parser/src/model_validator.py"

Reviewer 2: Missing highlights.

Author: Added the highlights

```

- The keyword argument `mode='after'` will cause the validator to be called after all field-level validation and parsing has been completed.

???+ info
    You can read more about validating list items, reusing validators, validating raw inputs, and a lot more in [Pydantic&#39;s documentation](`https://pydantic-docs.helpmanual.io/usage/validators/`).

**String fields that contain JSON data**

Wrap these fields with [Pydantic&#39;s Json Type](https://pydantic-docs.helpmanual.io/usage/types/#json-type){target="\_blank" rel="nofollow"}. This approach allows Pydantic to properly parse and validate the JSON content, ensuring type safety and data integrity.

=== "Validate string fields containing JSON data"

    ```python
    --8<-- "examples/parser/src/string_fields_contain_json.py"

>     ```

Reviewer 2: Missing highlights.

Author: Added the highlights

???+ tip
    For Mypy users, we only allow type override for fields where payload is injected e.g. `detail`, `body`, etc.

**Example: custom data model with Amazon EventBridge**
Use the model to validate and extract relevant information from the incoming event. This can be useful when you need to handle events with a specific structure or when you want to ensure that the event data conforms to certain rules.

=== "Custom data model"

    ```python hl_lines="4 8 17"
    --8<-- "examples/parser/src/custom_data_model_with_eventbridge.py"
    ```

=== "Sample event"

    ```json
    --8<-- "examples/parser/src/data_model_eventbridge.json"
    ```

## Advanced

### Envelopes

> You can use **Envelopes**, which are **JMESPath expressions**, to extract specific portions of complex, nested JSON structures. This is useful when your actual payload is wrapped around a known structure, for example Lambda Event Sources like **EventBridge**.

Reviewer: I think this is a leftover from the Data Classes feature, afaik we don't use JMESPath expressions here.

Reviewer 2: 100%! Thanks for this catch.

Envelopes can be used via `envelope` parameter available in both `parse` function and `event_parser` decorator.

=== "Envelopes using event parser decorator"

    ```python hl_lines="3 7-10 13"
    --8<-- "examples/parser/src/envelope_with_event_parser.py"
    ```

=== "Sample event"

    ```json hl_lines="12-16"
    --8<-- "examples/parser/src/envelope_payload.json"
    ```

#### Built-in envelopes

You can use pre-built envelopes provided by the Parser to extract and parse specific parts of complex event structures.

| Envelope name                 | Behaviour                                                                                                                                                                                             | Return                             |
| ----------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------- |

> | **DynamoDBStreamEnvelope**    | 1. Parses data using `DynamoDBStreamModel`. `` 2. Parses records in `NewImage` and `OldImage` keys using your model. `` 3. Returns a list with a dictionary containing `NewImage` and `OldImage` keys | `List[Dict[str, Optional[Model]]]` |

Reviewer: What are the double backtick quotes (``) here? Is it to create a new line? wasn't `<br />` more known/common?

Reviewer 2: This is because it is like an escape function to use `NewImage` and `OldImage` within the line.

| **LambdaFunctionUrlEnvelope** | 1. Parses data using `LambdaFunctionUrlModel`. ``2. Parses`body` key using your model and returns it.                                                                                                 | `Model`                            |
| **KafkaEnvelope**             | 1. Parses data using `KafkaRecordModel`. ``2. Parses`value` key using your model and returns it.                                                                                                      | `Model`                            |
| **VpcLatticeEnvelope**        | 1. Parses data using `VpcLatticeModel`. ``2. Parses`value` key using your model and returns it.                                                                                                       | `Model`                            |
| **BedrockAgentEnvelope**      | 1. Parses data using `BedrockAgentEventModel`. ``2. Parses`inputText` key using your model and returns it.                                                                                            | `Model`                            |

#### Bringing your own envelope

> You can create your own Envelope model and logic by inheriting from `BaseEnvelope`, and implementing the `parse` method or `@event_parser` decorator.

Reviewer: When you bring your own Envelope model, do you need to actually reimplement the `parse` method or decorator, or we meant "using"?

Also, is `parse` it actually a method (as in class method) or a function?

Reviewer 2: The only reason it makes sense for you to bring your own Envelope is because you want to parse the payload using different fields or applying some logic, so yes, it makes sense for you to implement the `parse` method when bringing yours.
